Su
I. Course Outline

V Semester-CSE (DATASCIENCE)
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
(Data Science)
Prepared by : Prof. Anbulakshmi S

Compiled By : Dr. Santosh Kumar S
 Dept. of CSE (DS), SVCE, Bengaluru
Sri Venkateshwara College of
Engineering
Subject
Code:
BAIL504
Program Outcomes
1 Engineering Knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering
fundamentals, and an engineering specialization to the solution of complex engineering
problems.
2 Problem Analysis: Identify, formulate, research literature, and analyze complex
engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principles of
mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences.
3 Design/Development of Solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems
and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate
consideration for the public health and safety, and the cultural, societal, and environmental
considerations.
4 Conduct Investigations of Complex Problems: Use research-based knowledge and
research methods including design of experiments, analysis and interpretation of data, and
synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions.
5 Modern Tool Usage: Create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and
modern engineering and IT tools including prediction and modeling to complex engineering
activities with an understanding of the limitations.
6 The Engineer and Society: Apply reasoning informed by the contextual knowledge to
assess societal, health, safety, legal, and cultural issues and the consequent responsibilities
relevant to the professional engineering practice
7 Environment and Sustainability: Understand the impact of the professional engineering
solutions in societal and environmental contexts, and demonstrate the knowledge of, and
need for sustainable development.
8 Ethics: Apply ethical principles and commit to professional ethics and responsibilities and
norms of the engineering practice.
9 Individual and Team Work: Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or
leader in diverse teams, and in multidisciplinary settings.s
10 Communication: Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities with the
engineering community and with society at large, such as, being able to comprehend and
write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give
and receive clear instructions.
11 Project Management and Finance: Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the
engineering and management principles and apply these to one’s own work, as a member
and leader in a team, to manage projects and in multidisciplinary environments.
12 Life-Long Learning: Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage
in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of technological change.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 1
DATAVISUALIZATIONLABORATORY
Sub Code: BCS358C IA Marks: 50
Total Hours: 25 Hours/Week: 02
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB Semester V
Course Code BAIL504 CIE Marks 50
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P: S) 0:0:2:0 SEE Marks 50
Credits 01 Exam Hours 100
Examination type (SEE) Practical
Course objectives:
● Understand the Importance of data Visualization for business intelligence anddecision
making.
● Learn different approaches to understand the importance of visual perception.
● Learn different data visualization techniques and tools.
● Gain knowledge of effective data visuals to solve workplace problems.
Sl.NO Experiments
1 Getting Started - Tableau Workspace, Tableau terminologies, basicfunctionalities.
2 Connecting to Data Source – Connecting to Database, Different types of TableauJoins.
3 Creating a View - formatting charts, adding filters, creating calculated fields anddefining
parameters.
4 Dashboard Design and Storytelling – Components of Dashboard, Understanding howto
place
worksheets in Containers, Action filters and its types.
5 Introducing Power BI –Components and the flow of work. Power BI DesktopInterfaceThe Report has five main areas.
6 Querying Data from CSV - Query Editor, Connecting the data from the Excel Source,Clean,
Transform the data.
7 Creating Reports & Visualizations - Different types of charts, Formatting chartswith
Title, Colors.
8 Dashboards - Filters in Power BI, Formatting dashboards.
9 1. Analysis of revenue in sales dataset:
2. Create a choropleth map (fill the map) to spot the special trends to showthe
state which has the highest revenue.
3. Create a line chart to show the revenue based on the month of the year.
4. Create a bin of size 10 for the age measure to create a new dimension to show
the revenue.
5. Create a donut chart view to show the percentage of revenue per region by
creating zero access in the calculated field.
6. Create a butterfly chart by reversing the bar chart to compare female & male
revenue based on product category.
7. Create a calculated field to show the average revenue per state &display
profitable & non-profitable state.
8. Build a dashboard.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 2
10 Analysis of GDP dataset:
1. Visualize the countries data given in the dataset with respect to latitudeand
longitude along with country name using symbol maps.
2. Create a bar graph to compare GDP of Belgium between 2006 – 2026.
3. Using pie chart, visualize the GDP of India, Nepal, Romania, SouthAsia,
Singapore by the year 2010.
4. Visualize the countries Bhutan & Costa Rica competing in terms of GDP.
5. Create a scatter plot or circle views of GDP of Mexico, Algeria, Fiji, Estonia from
2004 to 2006.
6. Build an interactive dashboard
11 Analysis of HR Dataset:
1. Create KPI to show employee count, attrition count, attrition rate, attrition
count, active employees, and average age.
2. Create a Lollipop Chart to show the attrition rate based on gender category.
3. Create a pie chart to show the attrition percentage based onDepartment
Category- Drag department into colours and change automatic to pie. Entire
view, Drag attrition count to angle. Label attrition count, change to percent,add
total also, edit label.
4. Create a bar chart to display the number of employees by Age group,
5. Create a highlight table to show the Job Satisfaction Rating for each jobrole
based on employee count.
6. Create a horizontal bar chart to show the attrition count for each Education field
Education field wise attrition – drag education field to rows, sum attrition count
to col,
7. Create multiple donut chart to show the Attrition Rate by Gender fordifferent
Age group.
12 Analysis of Amazon Prime Dataset:
1. Create a Donut chart to show the percentage of movie and tv shows
2. Create a area chart to shows by release year and type
3. Create a horizontal bar chart to show Top 10 genre
4. Create a map to display total shows by country
5. Create a text sheet to show the description of any movie/movies.
6. Build an interactive Dashboard.
Course outcomes (Course Skill Set):
At the end of the course the student will be able to:
Design the experiment to create basic charts and graphs using Tableau and
Power BI.
Develop the solution for the given real world problem.
Analyze the results and produce substantial writtendocumentation.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 3
Introduction to Various Data Visualization tools
Data visualization is the practice of translating information into a visual context,
such as a map or graph, tomake data easier for the human brain to understand and
pull insights from. It is the representation of information and data through use of
common graphics, such as charts, plots, infographics, and animations. Data
visualization is a powerful way for people, especially data professionals, to display
data so that it can beinterpreted easily.
Data Visualization enables decision-makers of any enterprise or industry to look into
analytical reports and understand concepts that might otherwise be difficult to
grasp.
Benefits of Data Visualization:
1. It is easy to understand the information with graphics
2. It made data to be represented in attractive way
3. Shows complex relationships
4. Helps to process large datasets
5. Useful for identifying trends
6. Minimizes ambiguity
Data visualization tools provide the ability to see and understand data trends,
outliers, and patterns in an easy, intuitive way. There are various data visualization
tools available. One must choose the tool based on various factors such as its ease
of use, types of graphical representations the tool can produce, size of the dataset
the tool can handle etc. some of Data Visualization tools are Tableau, Power BI,
Google Charts, Jupyter, Grafana etc.
The following are some common types of data visualizations:
1. Table: A table is data displayed in rows and columns, which can be easily
created in a Word document orExcel spreadsheet.
2. Chart or graph: Information is presented in tabular form with data displayed
along an x and y axis, usually with bars, points, or lines, to represent data in
comparison.
3. Geospatial visualization: Data is depicted in map form with shapes and
colours that illustrate the relationship between specific locations, such as a
choropleth or heat map.
4. Dashboard: Data and visualizations are displayed, usually for business
purposes, to help analystsunderstand and present data.
Introduction to Tableau andInstallation
Tableau is a data visualization tool that provides pictorial and graphical
representations of data. It is used for data analytics and business intelligence.
Tableau provides limitless data exploration without interrupting flow of analysis.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 4
With an intuitive drag and drop interface, user can uncover hidden insights in data
and make smarter decisions faster.
Tableau is a Business Intelligence tool for visually analyzing the data. Users
can create and distribute an interactive and shareable dashboard, which depict the
trends, variations, and density of the data in the form of graphs and charts. Tableau
can connect to files, relational and Big Data sources to acquire and process data.The
software allows data blending and real-time collaboration, which makes it very
unique. It is used by businesses, academic researchers, and many government
organizations for visual data analysis. It is also positioned as a leader Business
Intelligence and Analytics Platform in Gartner Magic Quadrant.
As a leading data visualization tool, Tableau has many desirable and unique
features. Its powerful data discovery and exploration application allows you to
answer important questions in seconds. You can use Tableau's drag and drop
interface to visualize any data, explore different views, and even combine multiple
databases easily. It does not require any complex scripting. Anyone who
understands the business problems can address it with a visualization of the
relevant data. After analysis, sharing with others is as easy as publishing to Tableau
Server.
Tableau Features
• Speed of Analysis − As it does not require high level of programming
expertise, any user with accessto data can start using it to derive value from the
data.
• Self-Reliant − Tableau does not need a complex software setup. The desktop
version which is used by most users is easily installed and contains all the features
needed to start and complete data analysis.
• Visual Discovery − The user explores and analyzes the data by using visual
tools like colors, trend lines, charts, and graphs. There is very little script to be
written as nearly everything is done by drag and drop.
• Blend Diverse Data Sets − Tableau allows you to blend different relational,
semi structured and raw data sources in real time, without expensive up-front
integration costs. The users don’t need to knowthe details of how data is stored.
• Architecture Agnostic − Tableau works in all kinds of devices where data
flows. Hence, the user need not worry about specific hardware or software
requirements to use Tableau.
• Real-Time Collaboration − Tableau can filter, sort, and discuss data on the
fly and embed a live dashboard in portals like SharePoint site or Salesforce. You can
save your view of data and allow colleagues to subscribe to your interactive
dashboards so they see the very latest data just by refreshingtheir web browser.
• Centralized Data − Tableau server provides a centralized location tomanage
all of the organization’spublished data sources. You can delete, change permissions,
add tags, and manage schedules in one convenient location. It’s easy to schedule
extract refreshes and manage them in the data server. Administrators can centrally
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 5
define a schedule for extracts on the server for both incremental and fullrefreshes.
Working on Tableau ---Some important screen shots and steps of sheets (NotRelated to
Programs )
Connecting to Data and preparing data for visualization in Tableau
Tableau supports connecting to a wide variety of data, stored in a variety of places.
For example, data mightbe stored on computer in a spread sheet or a text file, or in
a big data, relational, or cube (multidimensional) database on a server in enterprise
or the data can be from a public domain available on the web.
Data can be imported in Tableau Public from Connect panel on left side. For
example, an Excel sample dataset was loaded into Tableau as follows:
After clicking on open, screen is as follows:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 6
The data store page appears as above. The left pan shows that above dataset consists of
3 worksheets. If we drag orders table, screen appears as follows: Tableau automatically
identifies the data type of each column
.
Now drag Returns table onto the Canvas to the right of Orders table. This shows the
relation between the twotables Orders and Returns.
If we click on the link between Orders and Returns table names at the top gives the
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 7
summary of the relationship between the tables. Now rename the data store and click
on Sheet1 at the bottom left to proceed. This step creates a data extract which
improves query performance
Data aggregation and statistical functions
We can apply various aggregation and statistical functions on data such as count,
minimum, maximum, standard deviation, variance etc. This is shown below. This can
be done by right clicking on the required field of dataset, click on Default properties
and click on aggregation.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 8
Or the above operation can be done by creating a calculated field as shown below. To
create a calculated field,click on the down arrow button beside search tab above Tables
panel, drag a field to that calculated field window.
Then click on apply and results are shown below:
Dept. of CSE (DS) 9
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
In the same way we can apply any aggregate or statistical function on data with the help
of calculated fields.
Data Visualization
we can perform various visualization operations on data in Tableau. Some of them are
bar cart, histogram,bubble chart, gantt chart, scatter plot, heat map etc.
Bar chart:
Bar charts can be created in 3 variations in Tableau: Horizontal bars, stacked bars, sideby-side bars. Horizontal bars can be created by selecting that type of chart from Show
Me menu on right hand side of Canvas. The type of chart in box on right hand side
represents horizontal bar graph.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 3
Side-by-side bar chart can be created in following way.
Line graph: Line graph can be continuous or discrete
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 4
Discrete line graph is shown below:
Pie chart:
Dept. of CSE (DS) 5
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Bubble chart:
Dashboards
Dashboard is a way of displaying various types of visual data in one place. Usually, a
dashboard is intended to convey different, but related information in an easy-to-digest
form. And oftentimes, this includes things like key performance indicators (KPI)s or other
important business metrics that stakeholders need to see andunderstand at a glance.
Dashboards are useful across different industries and verticals because they’re highly
customizable. They can include data of all sorts with varying date ranges to help you
understand: what happened, why it happened, what may happen, and what action should
be taken.
For example, category of sales across months in a year, region is the field added. The first
view is shown below. This can be renamed at the bottom of the screen.
Now go to 2nd sheet for creating the 2nd view. The second view is shown below. A bubble
Dept. of CSE (DS) 6
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
chart was drawnbetween profit and subcategory. Then rename the sheet.
Next 3rd view is created as follows for profit for each subcategory in the category
with averages.
After creating individual views, now a Dashboard can be created by clicking
on create dashboard at the toolbar.
Dept. of CSE (DS) 7
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
After clicking on new dashboard option, the screen is shownbelow.
Now the sheets or views which are created earlier can be drag and dropped on this
dashboard. The above threecreated views are placed in the dashboard as follows. One
can follow their own way of importing sheets on the dashboard. After creating
dashboard, title can be given to the dashboard from Dashboard tab. Dashboard can
be customized in terms of its appearance by the user if required. Dashboard once
created can be saved on user’s system and can be retrieved whenever required.
Dept. of CSE (DS) 8
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
POWER BI
What is Power BI?
Power BI is a business intelligence tool that allows you to connect to various data
sources, visualize the data in reports and dashboards, and then share them with
anyone you want.
Power BI is a Data Visualization and Business Intelligence tool that converts data
from different data sourcesto interactive dashboards and BI reports.
What is Power BI Used For
Power BI is a tool in the category of Business Intelligence (BI). The purpose of BI is to
track Key PerformanceIndicators (KPIs) and uncover insights in business data so as
to better inform decision-making across the organization.
Power BI is used in different ways depending on the role of the individual, from
developers, analysts, managers, and directors, to everyone in between.
How Does Power BI Compare to Other Tools Like Tableau and Excel?
Power BI and Tableau are both business intelligence tools and have a lot of overlap
in terms of their capabilities. There are 2 key differences between Power BI and
Tableau:
1. Power BI only works on Windows, whereas Tableau supports both Windows
and MacOS.
2. Pricing options differ between Power BI and Tableau. However, Tableau is
generally the moreexpensive option.
Why Power BI?
“DATA “ Analysis and Decision Making
Organizations need a tool that can help them understand the large amount of data
that they are collecting. Itis a powerful data visualization and analysis tool that
allows businesses to turn raw data into actionable insights and reports.
Microsoft Power BI comes with a free or paid version. The free version only
provides Power BI tools like Power BI Desktop and Power Q&A to dashboards.
Whereas, in the Pro version they provide services like live report sharing, Power
View, and more Power BI apps.
Key Differences Between Power BI and Tableau
Power BI Tableau
Power BI uses DAX for measuring and
calculating columns.
Tableau deploys MDX for dimensions andmeasures.
Power BI is best for a limited volume of data. Tableau can handle huge columns of data and still offer better
performance.
Power BI offers many data points for data
visualization.
Tableau has better data visualization.
Dept. of CSE (DS) 9
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
PROGRAM 1: Getting Started - Tableau Workspace, Tableau terminologies,
Basic functionalities.
Working with Tableau thatfocuses on understanding the Tableau Workspace,
Tableau terminologies, andbasic functionalities.
Dataset used: vgsales.csv
1. Go to Start Page: Toggle between the active sheet and the Desktop Start Page.
2. Data Pane: Includes dimensions and measures, populated from your selected
data source. May alsoinclude calculated fields, parameters, or sets.
3. Analytics Pane: Includes options you can use to apply reference lines,
forecasts, trend lines, to addtotals to crosstabs, and to build boxplots.
4. Workbook Name: The file name of our workbook.
5. View Cards: Used for modifying the worksheet.
6. Toolbar Icons: Icons are available for quick access to popular features.
7. Worksheet/View: Workspace for building your visualizations.
8. Go to Data Source: Returns you to the data source specification page.
9. Worksheet Tabs: Click to view a specific worksheet, dashboard, or story
10. New Worksheet, Dashboard, and Story Tabs: Click to create a new
Worksheet, Dashboard, or Story.
11. Status Bar: Displays data about the fields and marks included in the view.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 10
Steps:
• Connect to Data:
1.Tableau Workspace
Setup:
• Open Tableau, and on the "Start Page," select Connect -> To a File ->
Text File.
• Browse to the location of vgsales.csv and open it.
• Data Preview:
• After loading, Tableau will show a preview of the data. You can rename
columns if necessary.
• Click on the "Sheet 1" tab at the bottom to go to your first worksheet.
Tableau Terminologies:
• Dimensions: These are qualitative fields. In vgsales.csv, examples
include Platform, Genre,andPublisher.
• Measures: These are quantitative fields used for calculations. Examples
are Global_Sales, NA_Sales,and Year.
• Rows and Columns Shelf: Drag dimensions and measures to the Rows
or Columns shelves to buildthe structure of your visualization.
• Marks: Controls the appearance of the data. You can set marks to be
circles, bars, or other shapes andcontrol size, color, and label.
• Filters: Used to limit the data displayed in the view.
• Pages Shelf: Used for creating animations or segmenting your view by
categories.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 11
2. Basic Functionalities:
a.Basic Visualization (Bar Chart of Global Sales by Genre):
• In your worksheet, drag Genre to the Columns shelf.
• Drag Global_Sales to the Rows shelf.
• You should see a bar chart. If the data isn’t aggregating correctly,
check if the aggregation is set to SUM by right-clicking Global_Sales ->
Measure -> Sum.
b.Sorting:
• Click on the Global_Sales axis and sort descending to show the genres with
the most sales first.
c.Filtering:
• Drag Year to the Filters shelf.
• Choose the range of years you want to display (e.g., 2000-2016).
• Add Year to the Pages shelf to create a dynamic view of how sales changed over time
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (AI & ML) 12
4 .Additional Functionalities:
Dashboards: Combine different sheets to create a comprehensive dashboard. Go
to the Dashboard tab, drag your created sheets to the layout, and arrange them
accordingly.
a. Add one more worksheet - Global Sales Trend by Year
• Drag Year to the Columns.
• Drag Global_Sales to the Rows.
• Create a line chart to show how global sales have trended over time.
• Add Genere to the Marks
• Apply color to Genere
b. Go to the Dashboard tab inTableau.
c. Add multiple visualizations to a single dashboard. (To increase dashboard
size - select size-Automatic)
d. Arrange charts (e.g., a line chart for yearly sales, a bar chart for top genres,
etc.).
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 13
PROGRAM 2 : Connecting to Data Source – Connecting to
Database, Different types of Tableau Joins.
Dataset used: Tableau Joins File: Contains 3 sheets : Demographics, Salary, Job
Title
1. Connecting to Excel Files in Tableau:
• Open Tableau and click on Connect in the left pane.
• Under To a File, choose Microsoft Excel.
• Browse and select your Excel file (Tableau Joins File.xlsx).
• Tableau will display the sheets from the Excel file in the Data Sourcetab.
• Drag the relevant sheets to the workspace.
2. Tableau Joins File.xlsx Dataset: has three Excel sheets
• Demographics:
• EmployeeID
• NameofEmployee
• EmployeeAge
• EmployeeGender
• Salary:
• EmployeeID
• EmployeeSalary
These sheets have a relationship based on the EmployeeID, and you can join
them using this field.
Drag and drop Demographics table- Right click-select open- that allows you to
do following types ofjoins.
Now Drag and drop Salary table - That allows you to do join of your choice.
3. Types of Joins inTableau:
Once both tables are in the Data Source tab, Tableau automatically suggests an
inner join, but you canmodify the type of join depending on the scenario.
a. Inner Join:
• Description: Returns only records where there is a match in both tables.
• How to Create in Tableau:
• Drag Demographics and Salary sheets into the canvas.
• Tableau automatically detects the common field (EmployeeID). If not,
manually select it.
• Choose Inner Join in the Join Type options.
• Result: You will see only employees whose employee id matches in both
Demographics andSalary table.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 14
b. Left Join:
a. Description: Returns all records from the left table
(Demographics), and matched records from the right table (salary).
If there’s no match, NULL values are returned for fields from the
right table.
How to Create in Tableau:
b. In the join settings, select Left Join.
c. Result: All employees will be returned, even if data missing in
Salary. Salary information willbe NULL for those without a match.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (AI & ML) 15
c. Right Join:
• Description: Returns all records from the right table (Salary), and
matched records from the left table(Demographics). If there’s no match,
NULL values are returned for fields from the left table.
• How to Create in Tableau:
• Select Right Join.
Result: You will see all salary, even if they don't
d. Full Outer Join:
• Description: Returns all records when there is a match in either the
left (Demographics) or right (Job Title) table. If there’s no match, NULL
values are returned for the missing side.
• How to Create in Tableau:
• Select Full Outer Join.
• Result: You will see all employees and all salary, even if they don’t
have a match in the other table. NULL values will appear where
there’s no corresponding record.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (AI & ML) 16
4. Creating a Visualization Based on Joins:
After performing the joins, you can build
different visualizations.Press on Sheet 1:
For example
• Bar Chart: Number of employees and their
salary.
• Drag NameofEmployee to Columns.
• Drag EmployeeSalary to Rows.
• This chart will display the number of employees and their salary based on the
type of join.
• Sort it in decending
• Drag EmployeeSalary to Marks - Select color Color, Label.
• After installing it we have to connect to Mysql
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 17
 Change Visualization Type:
In theShow Me panel on the right, select a bar chart or any other type that suits your needs.
PROGRAM 3: Creating a View – formatting charts, adding
filters, creating calculated fields anddefining parameters.
Step 1: Connect to Data
1. Open Tableau Desktop.2
2. Connect to Your Data Source:
a. Click on Connect on the left sidebar.
b. Choose your data source by selecting text file and load your vgsales dataset
into Tableau.
Step 2: Create a Basic Visualization
• Create a New Worksheet:
a)Click on the Sheet tab at the bottom of the screen.
• Drag Fields to Shelves:
a) Drag Year to the Columns shelf.
b) Drag Global Sales to the Rows shelf.
c) Drag EU Sales to the Rows shelf.
That gives the line graph
2. Connect to Your DataSource:
a)Click on Connect on the left sidebar.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 18
Step 3: Format the Chart
• Format Axes:
a) Right-click on the Global Sales axis and select Format.
b) In the Format pane, adjust the font style & size as needed.
• Add Titles and Annotations:
a) Click on the chart title area and enter a descriptive title - Global Sales by
Year.
b) Add annotations if needed to highlight specific data points – Right click the
on the chart which you want to highlight - Select Annotate - Select Mark -
Press Ok.
Step 4: Add Filters
Add a Filter for Year:Drag Year to the Filters shelf.Choose the range of years
you want to display (e.g., 2000-2016).
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 19
Step 5: Create Calculated Fields
Create a Calculated Field for SalesCategory:
a) Right-click on Global Sales - Select Create - Calculated Field.
b) Give name to your calculations as Global Sales - EU Sales
c) Do calculations as per your need - [Global Sales] - [EUSales]
d) Press Ok
Add Calculated Fields to Visualization:
a) Drag Global Sales-EU Sales to the Rows shelf to show Global Sales over Year
with GlobalSales-EU Sales over Year.
Step 6: Create a Parameter:
Name: "Select Genre"
• Data Type: String
• Values: List (e.g., "Action", "Adventure", "Shooter") or Add values from Genre.
• Create a Calculated Field:
• Name: "Sales by Genre"
• Formula:
• IF [Genre] = [Select Genre] THEN [Global Sales] ELSE 0 END
Build the Visualization:
• Columns: Drag "Year".
• Rows: Drag "Sales by Genre".
• At the right side of your sheet you can select required Genre and
can see different VisualizationVisualization by Genre: Fighting
Visualization by Genre:Puzzle
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 20
PROGRAM 4 : Dashboard Design and Storytelling – Components of Dashboard,
Understanding how to place worksheets in Containers, Action filters and its types.
CREATING A STORY WITH TABLEAU PUBLIC
With Tableau public, you are able to organize your data in order to tell a meaningful story.
This is beneficial when you are doing a presentation, creating an article, or uploading to
a website, as it helps your audience understand your data.
Stories are created through assembling the different worksheets and dashboards. We can
highlight important data points, add text box and pictures to help convey our story.
However, there are many different ways to tell a story. For example, one technique is
called “tailoring in” where the story starts with a big picture view and zooms in on a
specific detail.
In contrast, a story can also be told by starting with a case and zooming out to that big
picture view. We are going to return to our health expenditure worksheets to create a
tailoring in story and illustrate the changes in Canada’s spending in a meaningful way.
To begin, select “New Story” at the bottom right of your screen.
Drag “Sheet 1” and “Sheet 2” on to “Drag a sheet here”. We can rename each
storyboardby clicking “Add acaption”. Rename Sheet 1 to “Provincial Health
Expenditure in 2016”.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 21
Use the arrows located on the side of the caption field to navigate to Sheet 2.
Click on “Add a caption”and rename Sheet 2 to “Provincial Health Expenditure
from 1975-2018”.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 22
In this story, we are going to narrow in and draw attention to the province or territory
that is spending the most amount of money on health. Drag an additional copy of
“Sheet 1” and drop it between the two existing sheets. Select “Add a caption” and
rename it to “Ontario”.
On the map, click on the province Ontario and then navigate to the caption
field and select “Update”. Your screen will show Ontario highlighted fromthe
rest of Canada.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 23
Select the right arrow to navigate to “Provincial Health Expenditure from 1975-
2018”. Hover over the line representing Ontario and select the data point
representing health expenditure during the year 2016. Then click “Update”. Your
screen should look like this:
We can add a textbox to label the highlighted pointed by dragging “Drag to add text”
onto the linegraph. Write a key message in the textbox, such as “Ontario had the
highest health expenditure in Canada in 2016, spending $87,195.70M”. Select “OK”.
You can the edit the text box by selecting “More options” which will open a drop-down
menu.Expand the text box by dragging the borders in order to show the full message.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 24
We have now created a story with three sheets of how Ontario had the highest health
expenditurein the year 2016. If you choose to add a dashboard, it will allow your
audience to play with data. You can navigate between the story as shown below.
SAVING AND PUBLISHING YOUR TABLEAU PUBLIC WORKBOOK
Once satisfied with your workbook, which includes sheets, dashboards, and
stories, you can publish it to the Tableau Public website. This is the only way
to save your work whenusing Tableau Public,so make sure to do it if you wish
to return to the workbook in the future.
Once ready to publish, select the “Save to Tableau Public As…” option under
the “File”tab.
CREATING A DASHBOARD WITH TABLEAU
Dashboards are a great way to combine your data visualizations and have them
interact with one another. A lot of businesses use dashboards to keep up-todate in real time about key performance indicators at a glance.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 25
In this example, we will combine just twoof our data visualizations, the map
and the line graph from the first section of the tutorial,but in reality, it can be
used to combine manyvisualizations at once.
The first step in creating your dashboard is to open up the Dashboard tab at
the bottomof the screen:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 26
rovinces. T
This is your Dashboard Sheet. On the left side you can see that there is a list of the
sheets you havemade from your current data source.
To build your dashboard, drag the sheet you want in to the center where it says Drop
sheets here. For our purposes, we will need to drag Sheet 1 and Sheet 2 where the map
and line graph are saved. When you drag, you will notice an area of your screen will
shade over where your graph will dropwhen you put it down. Organize your dashboard
to look like the following:
Now to add titles to the graphs that were chosen, double click on the automatic titles
generated based on the sheet name, and a new window should appear, type in a title
that describes the graphlike so:
We can also add additional titles and objects to the dashboard by choosing an object
from the Objects side panel and dragging it to the dashboard. We are going to add
titles to the bottom line graph to differentiate between the Canada line and the
p o do this, drag to the area near the orange line that
corresponds to the sum of all provinces expenditure throughout the years. Type in
“Canada”. Drag once more to label the remaining provinces. Your bottom
graph should look like this:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 27
Now, to add an interactive layer between the graphs, we can choose a graph that can actas
a filterto the other. We will choose the line graph to act as a filter to the map. To do this,
click on the line graph and a grey sidebar should appear. From this bar, click the filter
icon to use this graph as a filter:
Now, when you click a given line, it will be highlighted on the above map:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 28
Congrats, now you have an interactive dashboard that is ready to be published or
saved!
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 29
PROGRAM 5: Introducing Power BI –Components and the flow of
work. Power BI Desktop Interface-The Report has five main areas.
Power BI includes the following components−
• Power BI Desktop − This is used to create reports and data
visualizations on the dataset.
• Power BI Gateway − You can use Power BI on-premises
gateway to keep your data fresh by connecting to your onpremises data sources without the need to move the data. It
allows you to query large datasets and benefit from the existing
investments.
• Power BI Mobile Apps − Using Power BI mobile apps, you can
stay connected to their data from anywhere. Power BI apps are
available for Windows, iOS, and Android platform.
• Power BI Service − This is a cloud service and is used to
publish Power BI reports and data visualizations
Fig 1 : The Components of Power BI
FLOW OF WORK
• A typical Power BI workflow involves more than one type of content.
• A Power BI designer (yellow in the diagram) collects data from semantic
models, brings it into Power BI Desktop for analysis, and creates reports
full of visualizations that highlight interesting facts and insights.
• The designer pins visualizations from reports to dashboards, and shares
the reports and dashboards with business users like you (black in the
diagram).
Fig 2: Flow ofwork
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 30
• A visualization (or visual), is a type of chart built by Power BI
designers. The visuals display the data from reports and semantic
models. Because they're highly interactive, you can slice, filter, highlight,
change, and even drill into visualizations.
• A semantic model is a container of data. For example, it might be an
Excel file from the World Health Organization. It might also be a companyowned database of customers, or it might be a Salesforce file. And it might
be all three if the designer combines them into a single model. Designers
manage semantic models. The data contained in semantic models is used
to build reports, dashboards, and apps that designers share with you.
• A dashboard is a single screen with tiles of interactive visuals, text,
and graphics. A dashboard collects your most important metrics, or a
focused set of metrics, on one screen, to tell a story or answer a question.
The dashboard content comes from one or more reports and one or more
semantic models.
• A report is one or more pages of interactive visuals, text, and graphics
that together make up a single report. Power BI bases a report on a
single semantic model. Often, the designer organizes report pages to each
address a central area of interest or answer a single question.
• An app is a way for designers to bundle and share related
dashboards, reports, and semantic models together. Business users
receive some apps automatically but can go search for other apps created
by colleagues or by the community. For example, out-of- the-box apps are
available for external services you may already use, like GoogleAnalytics
and Microsoft Dynamics CRM.
Power BI Desktop Interface-The Report has five mainareas.
Downloading and Installing Power BI Desktop
Power BI Desktop is available in both 32-bit and 64-bit versions. To download the
latest version, you can use the following link –
The Steps to be followed
1. Download from the link
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/power-platform/products/powerbi/downloads
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 31
2. Click on Products-→Power BI--→Desktop
3. Click on Advanced Download option
4. Select the Language as English and Click on download and
choose PBIDEsktopSetup_x64.exe
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 32
5. Download Begins and you will get exe file which will be
downloaded in your downloads folder
PBIDesktopSetu
p_x64
(2).exe
6. Double click on the .exe file ,to get the installation wizard
7. Click on Next button until you get Finish button and finally installation
will be done.
8. Once the Installation is done ,double click on Power BI App.
The screen appears as below
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 33
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 34
When you launch the application, Power BI Desktop will start with a blank report.
Let's go over the components of the Power BI Desktop Interface
• Ribbon - the top ribbon contains most of the controls and options needed for
building the report.
• Views - this is made up of the report view, the data view, and the model view.
• Canvas - this is the main design area where visualizations and other elements are
added.
• Page selector - for navigation to other pages in the report.
• Filters - fields can be added here to filter the data.
• Visualizations - this contains the list of available visualizations.
• Fields - this section contains the tables and fields that are available in the data model.
The Major Components of Power BI Desktop Interface are
Power Query Editor
It is the process of cleansing and transforming data and permits users to access
datasets connecting from multiple sources. It is included on the Power BI
desktop. Business users may view the data from distinct databases like MySQL,
SQL servers, DB2, and many more.
Power View
It is a data visualization tool that assists users in developing stunning charts,
and colourful maps, that turn data into a story.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 35
Power Map
It is a 3D map visualization tool to identify geospatial data on Map visuals. It
helps organizations to examine the maximum sales production geographically,
visualizing the demographic populations of specific regions.
Power Pivot
It is a Data Modelling technique that is used to create relationships between
datasets. It performs complex computations by utilizing DAX functions.
Power Q & A
When dealing with giant datasets, it becomes crucial to get to know the in-depth
details of the data. Luckily, it is done through natural language where users
may ask questions and obtain the answer through Power Q & A.
Build reports :
In Power BI Desktop Report view, you can build visualizations
and reports. The Report view has six main areas:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 36
1. The ribbon at the top, which displays common tasks associated with
reports and visualizations.
2. The canvas area in the middle, where you create and arrange visualizations.
3. The pages tab area at the bottom, which lets you select or add report pages.
4. The Filters pane, where you can filter data visualizations.
5. The Visualizations pane, where you can add, change, or customize
visualizations, and apply drillthrough.
6. The Format pane, where you design the report and visualizations.
7. The Fields pane, which shows the available fields in your queries. You
can drag these fields onto the canvas, the Filters pane, or the
Visualizations pane to create or modify visualizations.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
PROGRAM 6 :Querying Data from CSV - Query Editor, Connecting the
data from the Excel Source, Clean, Transform the data
Power BI Desktop also includes the Power Query Editor, which opens in a
separate window. In Power Query Editor, you can build queries and
transform data, then load the refined data model into Power BI Desktop to
create reports.
Along the left side of Power BI Desktop are icons for the three Power BI Desktop views:
Report, Data, and Model, from top to bottom. The current view is indicated by
the yellow bar along the left, and you can change views by selecting any of
the icons.
Report view is the default view.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 38
 CONNECT Data from different Sources)
With Power BI Desktop installed, we can connect to the world of data.
To see the many types of data sources available,
Once Power BI screen is seen click on blankReport
After clicking on blank Report the below screen appears .
NOW TO GET DATA FROM DIFFERENT SOURCES ------------- The steps
Step 1 : Select Get Data in the Power BI Desktop Home tab, and in
the Get Data window, scroll through the list of All data sources.(like
Excel,CSV,Oracle….)
On the Power BI Desktop Home tab, select Get Data > Excel workbook
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 39
Click on the file you need and open the file ,once you open the file below window
with navigator appears ,select the file (2nd option to see the contents of the file)
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 40
1.At this point you can select Load to load the table, or Transform data to make
changes in the table before you load it.
2.When you select Transform data, Power Query Editor launches, with a
representative view of the table. The Query Settings pane is on the right, or you
can always show it by selecting Query Settings on the View tab of Power Query
Editor.
Transforming the data: Once connected to a data source, you can adjust the
data to meet your needs.
To transform the data, you provide Power Query Editor with step-by-step
instructions for adjusting the data while loading and presenting it.
Transforming doesn't affect the original data source, only this particular viewof
the data.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 41
Transforming the data, includes renaming columns or tables, removing rows
or columns, or changing data types.
Power Query Editor captures these steps sequentially under Applied Steps in the
Query Settings pane.
Notice that the Applied Steps in Query Settings already contain a few steps. You
can select each step to see its effect in the Power Query Editor
To Change a data type
• Select the column or columns to change.
• Hold down the Shift key to select several adjacent columns, or Ctrl to select
non- adjacent columns.
• Either right-click a column header, select Change Type,
• choose a new data type from the menu, or drop down the list next to Data Type
in the Transform group of the Home tab,
• select a new data type.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 42
To Reduce/Delete theRows
• From the Home tab select
• Reduce Rows > Remove Rows > Remove Bottom Rows.
• In the Remove Bottom Rows dialog box, enter 10, and then select OK.
The bottom 10 worst rows are removed from the table, and the step
Removed Bottom Rows appears in Applied Steps.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 43
To Remove columns
• From Home Tab Select Manage Columns group select Remove Columns.
You can also right-click one of the selected column headers and select Remove
Columns from the menu.
• The selected columns are removed, and the step Removed Columns appears
in Applied Steps.
Applied steps in the Query setting pane
Right-click any step in the Applied Steps pane and choose to delete it, rename it,
move it up or down in the sequence, or add or delete steps after it.
For intermediate steps, Power BI Desktop will warn you if the change could affect
later steps and break your query.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 44
Once all the required transformations are done the report should be
created in the Power BI Desktop
• Apply the changes in Power Query Editor and load them into Power BI
Desktop
• Selecting Close & Apply from the Home tab of the ribbon.
• You can also select just Apply to keep the query open inPower
Query Editor while you work in Power BI Desktop.
To reopen Power Query Editor from Power BI Desktop
Select Transform Data on the Home tab of the Power BI Desktop ribbon.
You can expand and collapse the Filters, Visualizations, and Fields panes
by selecting the arrows at the tops of the panes. Collapsing the panes
provides more space on the canvas to build cool visualizations.
The Visualizations pane shows information about the visualization
1. The Fields option in the Visualization pane lets you drag data fields to
Legend and other field wells in the pane.
2. The Format option lets you apply formatting and other controls to visualizations.
3. The icons show the type of visualization created. You can change the type
of a selected visualization by selecting a different icon, or create a new
visualization by selecting an icon with no existing visualization selected
4. The options available in the Fields and Format areas depend on the type
of visualization and data you have.
5. You want your map visualization to show only the top 10 weather states.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 45
To show only the top 10 states, in the Filters pane, hover over State is (All) and
expand the arrow that appears. Under Filter type, drop down and select Top N.
Under Show items, select Bottom, because you want to show the items with the
lowest numerical ranks, and enter 10 in the next field
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 46
PROGRAM 7 : Creating Reports & Visualizations - Different
types of charts, Formatting charts with Title, Colors
17 Most Common Charts available in Power BI:
● Bar Chart
● Line Chart
● Scatterplot
● Sparkline
● Pie Chart
● Gauge
● Waterfall Chart
● Funnel Chart
● Heat Map / Matrix
● Histogram
● Box Plot
● Maps
● Tables
● Indicators
● Area Chart
● Radar or Spider Chart
● Tree Map
● Open Power BI Desktop
● Click on Get data in ribbon pane
● Click on Excel worksheet option
• Choose specific dataset and open it. Example: HR Data.csv
• Click on Transform Databutton
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 47
• Power Query Editor window will open.
• We have to perform some transformation on this table
• Select row 1 and click on Use first row asheader
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 48
• Then, we have to create new column for attrition count. For this, select attrition
column
click on Add Column new window will open then add details as
follows. Once you are done with this, attrition count column will be added
as a last row of the table
• Change the datatype of this column to whole number
• Click on Close &Apply.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 49
• You will be back on canvas area with table loaded in Data Pane (in right side).
We will start with KPIChart
• A Key Performance Indicator (KPI) is a visual that communicates the amount
progress made toward a measurable goal
Click on
“Close &
Apply”
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 50
Now format this particular visual with title, size, colour.
1. Click on “Format your visual” in Visualization Pane
2. Go to General tab
a. click on Title type “Overall Employees” in Text box, Horizontal
alignment and colour of your choice
b. expand effects OFF the background of KPI chart
c. Effects ON visual border change the color and 20 roundedcorners
3. Now, go to Visual tab OFF the category label
4. In visual tab, callout value change the font color
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 51
Kindly Note: If you want same format for all visuals, complete the
formatting with one of the visual, click on format painter and click on
the visual for which you want the formatting. Little bit formatting will
be required as properties for each visual will be different
Select Pie Chart.
Now apply same steps for creating STACKED COLUMN CHART.
A column chart, commonly referred to as a vertical bar graph, is a visual
tool utilized to display and compare numerical data across different
categories. Each column within the chart corresponds to a specific
category, with the height of the column proportionally representing the
associated value.
Optional: As you can see, age is not sorted correctly, so we have to create
additional column.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 52
Once sort age column is created change the datatype of column if its not in
whole number. Click on “Close & Apply”
Now, on canvas, in data pane select CP_age_band click on sort by
column select newly created column sort age and now
click on visual and follow the steps, Finally, output will be as follows:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 53
Finally, output will be as follows
:
Now apply same steps for creating MATRIX.
The matrix visual is a type of table visual that supports a stepped layout. A
table supports two dimensions, but a matrix makes it easier to display data
meaningfully across multiple dimensions. Often, report designers include
matrixes in reports and dashboards to allow users to select one or more element
(rows, columns, cells) in the matrix to cross-highlight other visuals on a report
page.
Format the row header & column header text color & background color
Also, format the Row grand total & column grand total
Now apply same steps for creating Stacked Bar Chart.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 54
Now apply same steps for creating Donut.
A doughnut chart is similar to a pie chart in that it shows the relationship
of parts to a whole. The only difference is that the center is blank and
allows space for a label or icon.
Doughnut charts work best when you use them to compare a particular
section to the whole, rather than comparing individual sections with each
other.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 55
Slicers: A slicer is a standalone chart that can be used to filter the other
visuals on the page. Slicers come in many different formats (category,
range, date, etc.) and can be formatted to allow selection of only one,
many, or all of the available values.
Slicers are a great choice to:
• Display commonly used or important filters on the report canvas for easier access.
• Make it easier to see the current filtered state without having to open a dropdown list.
• Filter by columns that are unneeded and hidden in the data tables.
• Create more focused reports by putting slicers next to important visuals.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 56
focused page.
PROGRAM 8:Dashboards - Filters in Power BI, Formattingdashboards
Filters remove all but the data you want to focus on.
Filter Pane: You can apply filters in the Filters pane, or make selections in slicers
directly on the report page itself. The Filters pane shows the fields in individual
visuals and any other filters the report designer adds.
There are four standard types of filters that you create in the Filters pane.
• Visual filter applies to a single visual on a report page. You see visuallevel filters when you select a visual on the report canvas. Even if you
can't edit a report, you can select a visual and filter it.
• Page filter applies to all the visuals on the report page.
• Report filter applies to all pages in the report.
• Drill through filter With drill through in the Power BI service and Power
BI Desktop, you create a destination report page that focuses on a
specific entity, such as a supplier. From the other report pages, users
can right-click a data point for that entity and drill through to the
•
We will be using HR dataset (same used for Exp7).
Extending same dashboard with using filters & let’s format the final
dashboard. Let’s apply filter for department (Particular visual).
1. Drag Department from Data Pane to Filters Filters on this page
textbox. Basic Filtering
2. Now, you can see, HR dept. is selected and now in below picture, you
can see that only HR data is visible, whereas, R&D and Sales data will
not be shown.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 57
Now, HR and R&D departments areselected.
3. Now, lets try for advanced filter
Let’s find out results for salary greater than equal to 10000.
Drag and drop Monthly Income in
filter Filter type: advanced filtering
Show items when the value: is greater than or
equal to Value: 10000
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 58
4. Now, try for Top N filtering. Try to display top 4 Job roles
having highest job satisfaction.
• Select “Job satisfaction rating” visual In Filters Pane, Filters on this
visual
Job Role
Filter type:
Top N
Show item: Top : 4
By value: Sum of Job Satisfaction
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 59
PROGRAM 9 : BUILDING DASHBOARD
Analysis of revenue in salesdataset:
i) Create a choropleth map (fill the map) to spot the special trends to show
the state which has the highest revenue.
ii) Create a line chart to show the revenue based on the month of the year.
iii) Create a bin of size 10 for the age measure to create a new
dimension to show the revenue.
iv) Create a donut chart view to show the percentage of revenue per
region by creating zero access in the calculated field.
v) Create a butterfly chart by reversing the bar chart to compare female
& male revenue based on product category.
vi) Create a calculated field to show the average revenue per state &
display profitable & non-profitable state.
vii) Build a dashboard.
Solution:
Step1: Upload the revenue dataset
Step2: In the power query editor as part of transformation remove the unnecessary
columns (Remove the last null column)
Question 1: Create a choropleth map (fill the map) to spot the special
trends to show the state which has the highest revenue.
Step1: Select the "Map" visualization from the Visualizations
pane.(filled map) Step2: Set Up the Map:
• Drag the state field to the "Location" field well.
• Drag the revenue field to the "Size" or "Values" fieldwell.
Step3: Customize: In the "Format" pane, adjust settings such as color, size,
and tooltips to enhance readability. You can use color gradients to indicate
different revenue levels, helping to spottrends.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 60
Question 2: Create a line chart to show the revenue based on the month
of the year. Step1:Add a Line Chart: Select the "Line chart" visualization
from the Visualizations pane.
Step2: Configure the Chart:
• Drag the month field to the "Axis" field well.
• Drag the revenue field to the "Values" field well.
Step3: Format: In the "Format" pane, you can customize the line color, axis
titles, and other aspects to clearly present the revenue trend throughout
the year
.
Question 3: Create a bin of size 10 for the age measure to create a new
dimension to show the revenue.
Step1: Create Bins for age
• Go to the "Data" view and select the age field.
• Right-click on the age field and choose "New group".
• In the "Group" window, select "Bin" and set the bin size to 10.
Step2: Add to Visualization:
• Create a new visualization (e.g., bar chart or column chart). Here weused
Stacked column chart.
• Drag the new age bins field to the "X Axis" and the revenue field to the "Yaxis”.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 61
Question 4: Create a donut chart view to show the percentage of revenue per
region by creating zero access in the calculated field.
Step1: Add a Donut Chart: Select the "Donut chart" visualization from the
Visualizations pane.
Step2:Set Up the Chart:
• Drag the region field to the "Legend" field well.
• Drag the revenue field to the "Values" fieldwell.
Step3: Create Zero Access:
• Go to the "Format" pane, select "Detail labels", and set the "Label
position" to "Inside" to create a zero access effect.
• Adjust the "Detail" and "Percentage" settings as needed.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 62
•
Note: The "zero access effect" is a visual design technique often used indata
visualizations to emphasize or clearly show zero values or the absence of
certain data. This effect is particularly useful in charts where you wantto
highlight how values are distributed relative to zero, or where zero plays a
significant role in the interpretation of the data.
Donut Charts:
In a donut chart, the zero access effect can be used to enhance readability by
placing labels or markers at the center of the chart or using a specific design
to show where there is no data.
For example, if one segment of a donut chart represents zero revenue, you
might design the chart so that this segment is clearly visible or highlighted
to indicate no revenue.
Question 5: Create a butterfly chart by reversing the bar chart to compare female
& male revenue based on product category.
Step1: Create a New Measure
TotalRevenue =
sum(SalesTable[Revenue])
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 63
Method-1: By using stacked column chart
Method 2:
Step 1:
Add Two Bar Charts:
o Create two separate bar charts from the "Visualizations" pane.
Step 2:
Configure the First Bar Chart (e.g.,Female
Revenue): Drag ProductCategory to the "Axis" field.
Drag TotalRevenue to the "Values" field.
Apply a Filter:
▪ In the "Filters" pane, add a filter to show only Female revenue. You can
drag Gender to the "Filters" pane and set the filter to include onlyFemale.
Step 3:
Configure the Second Bar Chart (e.g., Male Revenue):
Drag ProductCategory to the "Axis"
field. Drag TotalRevenue to the
"Values" field. Apply a Filter:
▪ In the "Filters" pane, add a filter to show only Male revenue. You can
drag Gender to the "Filters" pane and set the filter to include only Male.
Step 4:
Reversing the Bars:
• To create the butterfly effect, you need to reverse one of the bar charts.
This involves adjusting the direction of the bars so that they face
opposite directions from the center. o Reverse the Bars:
▪ For one of the charts (e.g., Male revenue), you will need to use a calculated
column or measure to make the bars extend in the opposite direction. In
Power BI, this can be achieved by adjusting the data in the chart's settings
or using custom visualizations if necessary.
Add Titles and Labels:
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 64
• Add clear titles and labels to each chart to indicate what data they
represent (e.g., "Female Revenue" and "Male Revenue").
• Customize the chart's appearance to enhance readability.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 65
Question 6:Create a calculated field to show the average revenue per state &
display profitable & non-profitable state.
Step1: Create a New Measure
• Go to the Modeling tab and select "New Measure".
• Create the Average RevenueMeasure:
• Enter the following DAX formula to calculate the average revenue per state:
AverageRevenuePerStat
e = AVERAGEX(
VALUES(SalesTable[State]),
CALCULATE(SUM(SalesTable[Revenue]))
)
Step2: Create a Calculated Column to Categorize States
Next, create a calculated column to classify states as profitable ornonprofitable based on the average revenue.
1. Go to the Modeling tab and select "New Column".
2. Create the Profitability Column:
Enter the following DAX formula to create a column that categorizes statesas
profitable or non-profitable:
ProfitabilityStatus =
IF(SalesTable[AverageRevenuePerState] > 1000,
"Profitable",
"NonProfitable"
)
Step 3: Display the Results
1. Add a Table and select state, AverageRevenueState and ProfitablitiyStatus.
Dept. of CSE (DS) 66
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
Extra : To get the Total value or single value
In Power BI, a Card visualization is used to display a single, important piece
of data, such as a key metric or a number. It is commonly used to show
aggregate values like:
• Total Sales
• Average Profit
• Total Units Sold
• Number of Customers
The Card provides a clean and simple way to highlight critical metricsthat
are important for decision-making. It's ideal for dashboard views where
quick insights are needed.
To show the total revenue
Drag the Revenue field into the field well
Dept. of CSE (DS) 67
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
To Add filter orSlicer
Filter Data: Slicers filter data across multiple charts and visuals in a report.
For example, selecting a specific region or product category in a slicer can
update all connected visuals to reflect data only for that selection.
Steps : 1. Select slicer from the Visual pane
2. Drag the Country field into the field well
Question 7:Build a dashboard.
Dept. of CSE (DS) 68
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
PROGRAM 10 : Analysis of GDP dataset
i)Visualize the countries data given in the dataset with respect to latitude and
longitude along withcountry name using symbol maps
Step1: Bring Latitude
Step2: Bring Country in Color Marks Pane
Bring any Year Measured Value to Label after that You be able to see screen as in below
ii) Create a bar graph to compare GDP of Belgium between 2006 – 2026.
Step1:
Get Measured Names to Filter Pane then select as in years
mentioned 2006 – 2026.Get Country to Filter and Select
Belgium
Step2:
Drag Measured Name and Country into Column
Step3:
Drag Measured Value to Row You see outputs
Dept. of CSE (DS) 69
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BCIL504)
iii)Using pie chart, visualize the GDP of India, Nepal,
Romania, South Asia, Singapore by the year 2010.
Step1:
Get Country to Filter pane and select India, Nepal,
Romania, South Asia, SingaporeGet Measure Name to
Filter and select 2010 Step2: Important Step
Select option of chart as Pie(instead of automatic in Marks Pane) andDrag
Country in Color frame
Finaly Sum or avg or anything of your choice to angle Frame ( For sum its
SUM[(2010)], For average itsAVG[(2010)] from measure value
The output result is as in below
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 70
iv)Visualize the countries Bhutan & Costa Rica competing in terms of GDP.
Step1: Filter Country and Measure name Iike Bhutan,Costarics and
2016,2017,2018 as year(Measure name)
Step2:Add Country and Measure Names in column, Measure Values in Row
Step3:For better view add Measure Names to Color frame in Marks pane
iv)Create a scatter plot or circle views of GDP of Mexico, Algeria, Fiji,
Estonia from 2004 to 2006.
Step1:Add Country in filter as per requirement
Add measure names in filter and select as per requirement
Step2: Add Measured Name in Column and an add any measured values of year
2004,2005,2006Finally opt for Circle as option
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 71
Program 11. Analysis of HR Dataset:
i)Create KPI to show employee count, attrition count, attrition rate, attrition count,
active employees, and average age.
ii) Create a Lollipop Chart to show the attrition rate based on gender category.
iii) Create a pie chart to show the attrition percentage based on Department
Category- Drag department into colours and change automatic to pie. Entire view,
Drag attrition count to angle. Label attrition count, change to percent, add total
also, edit label.
iv) Create a bar chart to display the number of employees by Age group,
v) Create a highlight table to show the Job Satisfaction Rating for each job role
based on employee count.
vi) Create a horizontal bar chart to show the attrition count for each Education
field Education field wise attrition – drag education field to rows, sum attrition
count to col,
vii) Create multiple donut chart to show the Attrition Rate by Gender for
different Age group. Solution :
i) Create KPI to show employee count, attrition count, attrition rate,
attrition count, active employees, and average age.
Step1: Create a New measure
Employee Count = COUNT('HR'[EmployeeNumber])
Step2: Choose KPI card in the visualization and drag and drop the Employee Count.
Format your visuals of your style.
Step3: Create a New Measure
Attrition Count = COUNTROWS(FILTER('HR', 'HR'[Attrition]="Yes"))
Step4: Choose KPI card in the visualization and drag and drop the Attrition
Count. Format your visuals of your style.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 72
Step5: Create a New Measure
Attrition Rate = DIVIDE([Attrition Count], [Employee Count], 0) *100
Step6: Choose KPI card in the visualization and drag and drop the Attrition Rate.
Format your visuals of your style.
Step7: To find active employees create a new
measure Active Employees = [Employee
Count] - [Attrition Count]
Step8: Choose KPI card in the visualization and drag and drop the Active
Employees. Format your visuals of yourstyle.
Step9: To calculate average age create a new
measure Average Age = AVERAGE(HR[Age])
Step10: Choose KPI card in the visualization and drag and drop the Average Age.
Format your visuals of your style.
ii)Create a Lollipop Chart to show the attrition rate based on gender category.
Power BI does not have a native Lollipop Chart, so you will simulate it using
(any chart) a Line and Stacked column Chart
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 73
ii) Create a pie chart to show the attrition percentage based on Department
CategoryDrag department into colours and change automatic to pie. Entire view, Drag
attrition count to angle. Label attrition count,change to percent, add total also, edit
label.
• From the Visualizations pane on the right, select the Pie Chart visual icon.
This will add a blank pie chart to your report canvas.
Set Up the Pie Chart:
• Drag the Department Field to the Legend area.
• Drag the Attrition Count Measure to the Values area.
Configure Data Labels andFormatting:
• Click on the Pie Chart to select it.
• Open the Format Pane (paint roller icon).
Change Data Label Settings:
• Go to the Data Labels section in the Format pane.
• Toggle Data Labels to On.
• In the Data Label settings, change Label Style to Percent. This will show the
percentage of each department's attrition relative to the total.
• To show the Total alongside thepercentages:
o Ensure that Data Labels are visible and set to Show.
o You can add a Total Label in the Title or Tooltips sections if needed for
additional context.
Format the Pie Chart:
• Adjust Colors:
o Go to the Data Colors section in the Format pane.
o You can customize colors for each department by clicking on the color
next to the department name and choosing the color you prefer.
• Edit Labels:
o If you want to customize the text in the labels, you can use the Data
Label formatting options to adjust font size, color, and display units.
Finalize Your Visualization:
• Ensure your pie chart looks as expected with percentages representing the
attrition rate for each department.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 74
iii) Create a bar chart to display the number of
employees by Age group, Step1: right click Age and
choose new group and set bin size as 5.
Step2: Choose any bar chart drag and drop new age bin and employee count.
V) Create a highlight table to show the Job Satisfaction Rating for each job
role based on employee count.
• Create a Matrix visual from the Visualizations pane.
• Drag the Job Role field to Rows.
• Drag the Job Satisfaction Rating field to Columns.
• Drag the Employee Count measure to Values.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 75
VI) Create a horizontal bar chart to show the attrition count for each
Education field Education field wise
Attrition – drag education field to rows, sum attrition count to col,
Step1: Horizontal bar chart It's called the Clustered Bar Chart or Stacked Bar
Chart in the visualizationpane
Choose stacked bar chart and set y axis is education filed and x axis is attrition
count.
vii) Create multiple donut chart to show the Attrition Rate by Gender for
different Age group. Choose donut chart and drag and drop legend as
gender and value as attrition rate.
1. Select the Donut Chart from the Visualizations pane.
2. Create separate Donut Charts for different age groups.
• For each chart, filter the dataset based on age group (using the AgeGroup
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 76
field created earlier).
3. Drag the Gender field to Legend.
Drag the Attrition Rate measure toValues
1. Repeat for each age group, ensuring each donut chart represents a different
age group with gender breakdown.
Note:
• Use Filters to dynamically adjust visuals where necessary (e.g., filter by Age
Group or Education Field).
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 77
PROGRAM 12: Analysis of Amazon Prime Dataset
i) Create a Donut chart to show the percentage of movie and tv shows
ii) Create a area chart to shows by release year and type
iii) Create a horizontal bar chart to show Top 10 genre
iv) Create a map to display total shows by country
v) Create a text sheet to show the description of any movie/movies.
vi) Build an interactive Dashboard.
Step1: Upload the Amazon CSV dataset.
Step2: Transform data and make the data ready for reporting.
As part of Transformation remove you can remove blank, null values and
remove columns which is not required for analysis.
Step3: Select close and apply.
i).Create a Donut chart to show the percentage of movie and tv shows
• From the Visualizations pane, select the Donut chart.
• Drag the 'Type' field to the Legend section.
• Drag any suitable column (e.g., ID or Title) to Values, then set the
aggregation to Count.
• Use filters to filter only movie and TV show.This will show the percentage
of Movies vs TV Shows.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 78
ii) Create a area chart to shows by release year andtype.
• Ensure your dataset contains a Release Year column and a Type column
(Movies/TV Shows).
Steps to Create Area Chart:
• Choose Area chart from the Visualizationspane.
• Drag the 'Release Year' field to the Axissection.
• Drag the 'Type' field to Legend.
• Drag the Title (or other identifying fields) to Values(Y Axis), and set the
aggregation to Count.
• You’ll now see an area chart with Movies and TV Shows distributed over the
years.
• Note: Use filters to filter only movies and TV show.
•
iii. Create a horizontal bar chart to show Top 10genre.
Note: Make sure you have a Genre column in your dataset.(Rename the column
listed in to Genre)
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 79
Steps to Create Horizontal Bar Chart:
• From the Visualizations pane, select Bar chart and adjust it to display
horizontally.
• Drag the Genre column to the Axis section.
• Drag the Title (or other identifier) to Values, and set the aggregation to Count.
• In the Filters pane, filter the Top N to display the Top 10 Genres by the count
of content.
• From the Visualizations pane, select Bar chart and adjust it to display
horizontally.
iv.Create a map to display total shows by country.
Make sure you have a country column in your dataset.
Steps to Create a Map:
• Choose Filled Map from the Visualizations pane.
• Write a new measure to count show id
count showid = count(amazon_prime_titles[release_year])
• Drag the Country field to the Location section.
• Check the count showed measure in the data pane.
• This will show a world map representing the total number of shows produced
in each country.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 80
iv) Create a text sheet to show the description of anymovie/movies.
• Ensure your dataset has a Description column for each movie/TVshow.
• Choose Table from the visuals and check the title and description columns.
You can add slicer to search by title to get thedescription.
DATA VISUALIZATION LAB (BAIL504)
Dept. of CSE (DS) 81
v) Build an interactive Dashboard:
